[‹ previous](./2.1-DOM-and-CSSOM.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[home](../../README.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[next ›](./2.3-Render-Blocking-CSS.md)

# 2.2 Render Tree

Now that the browser knows which elements should be rendered and how these elements should look like when rendered, it can finally start rendering the elements. The DOM tree and the CSSOM tree are combined into the render tree, which knows everything it needs to know to start painting pixels on the screen.

## Content

- [Constructing the render tree](#constructing-the-render-tree)
- [The layout stage](#the-layout-stage)
- [Painting](#painting)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Constructing the render tree

To construct the render tree, the browser goes trough following steps:

- Starting from the root node the browser constructs a new tree that only contains visible nodes. Some nodes are never visible (scripttags, metatags, ...), some nodes are hidden via CSS (mark that `visibility: hidden` hides a node but still influences the layout, these nodes are still taken into account in the render tree).
- For every visible node, the browser will check the CSSOM to apply the style rules that match the node.

With the render tree in place, we can proceed to the 'layout' stage.

## The layout stage

Now that we know which elements have to be rendered and which style rules should be applied to them we can start calculating the exact position of each node within the viewport of the device. Again the browser starts at the root node and converts all relative units to absolute pixels. The output is often referred to as the 'box model'.

### What it looks like

- body

  ```css
  font-size: 16px;
  padding: 20px;
  ```

  - p.message

    ```css
    font-size: 20px;
    font-weight: bold;
    ```

    - span.name

      ```css
      color: hotpink;
      font-size: 20px;
      font-weight: bold;
      ```

  - div.group

    ```css
    font-size: 16px;
    ```

    - &::before

      ```css
      content: "to the ";
      font-size: 16px;
      ```

## Painting

So, now we know which elements should be visible, which style rules are applied to these elements, and the absolute size of each element. Based on this information the browser is able to convert the render tree to actual pixels on the screen. This process is often referred to as 'Painting' or 'Rasterizing'.

## Conclusion

Each step and each calculation that has to be done takes up a reasonable amount of time. It is important to know that when updating the DOM or CSSOM (for example via javascript) the entire process has to be repeated.
