[‹ previous](../Chapter%202:%20Deep%20Dive/2.3%20Render%20Blocking%20CSS.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[home](../../README.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[next ›](../Chapter%203:%20Layout/3.2%20Positioning.md)

# 3.1 Sizing

In this chapter we'll cover the things you need to know to get a certain element to a certain size.

## Content

- [Box Sizing](#box-sizing)
- [Display](#display)
- [Margin and Padding](#margin-and-padding)
- [Specifying Sizes](#specifying-sizes)

## Box Sizing

The most important thing you should understand when you're dealing with the size of a certain element, is its Box Model. The box model 'content-box' has been the default value for a while and when you're working with absolute units it is just a matter of doing the correct calculations to get the job done.

#### Example 
```css
.element {
  border: solid 5px #bada55;
  padding: 10px;
  width: 200px;
}
```

With the example above our element would have a calculated with of 230px (200 + 10 + 10 + 5 + 5). So apart from the fact that it might be a bit counter-intuitive, we don't really need to change the box model.

The problem start when we're using relative units. If we're using percentages as width but still want that 10px padding and a 5px border, there is no (proper) way to set the width correctly. For that reason we need to change the box model of the element.

#### Example
```css
.element {
  border: solid 5px #bada55;
  box-sizing: border-box;
  padding: 10px;
  width: 100%;
}
```

With the example above the element would be as big as its container, and the padding and border will cut into the width of our element. The actual width of our element would be 100% - 30px.

## Display

Besides chosing the appropriate box model for your element, you should also decide how your element should be displayed or in other words how your element should behave. If you're able to chose the appropriate display value for the appropriate situation, it will be so much easier to apply the required layout on your element.

### Inline

Displaying an element inline makes the element behave as text. The element will sit inline with normal text even when margin or padding is applied. The margin and padding will only push the text away horizontally but never vertically.

#### Example

```html
<div>
  Here is some text 
  <div class="inline">and i'm inline. </div>
  And here is some more text.
<div>
```

```css
.inline {
  background-color: #bada55;
  border: solid 5px hotpink;
  display: inline;
  margin: 10px;
  padding: 10px;
}
```

### Inline Block

Displaying an element as inline-block makes the element follow the baseline of the text. Which basically means that the last line of your element will be inline with the text. You will also push other text lines away vertically.

#### Example

```html
<div>
  Here is some text 
  <div class="inline-block">and i'm inline block. </div>
  And here is some more text.
<div>
```

```css
.inline-block {
  background-color: #bada55;
  border: solid 5px hotpink;
  display: inline-block;
  margin: 10px;
  padding: 10px;
  width: 30px;
}
```

### Block

Displaying an element as block makes everything break past the element. Your element will start on a new line, and force the following element to start on a new line. By default a block elements takes up all the horizontal space there is.

#### Example

```html
<div>
  Here is some text 
  <div class="block">and i'm block. </div>
  And here is some more text.
<div>
```

```css
.block {
  background-color: #bada55;
  border: solid 5px hotpink;
  display: block; /* could be removed, because UA will set it as default value for many container elements (e.g. div/p/...) */
  margin: 10px;
  padding: 10px;
}
```

### Table

Using the table display values makes it easy to create a table system without changing HTML. An example will make it clear how we'll do this.

#### Example

```html
<div class="table">
  <div class="row">
    <div class="cell">First cell</div>
    <div class="cell">Second cell</div>
    <div class="cell">Third cell</div>
  </div>
</div>
```

Using the HTML above we'll start by creating a simple table layout.

##### Basic table layout

```css
.table {
  display: table;
}

.row {
  display: table-row;
}

.cell {
  display: table-cell;
}
```

It's as easy as that, from now on the 3 div's with the class `.cell` will be displayed next to each other like cells in a table. Though this is a proper solution for some situation it comes with some pitfalls:

- It's not possible to add padding or margin to a table-row
- It's not possible to add margin to a table-cell
- A table will by default wrap around it's content. If you want it to take up it's container horizontal space you'll need to specify a width (e.g. 100%).

Because our elements are now behaving as table elements, we're also able to use table css properties on the element.

##### Table layout
```css
.table {
  display: table;
  table-layout: fixed;
}
```

By default table-cells will take up as much space as they need so the table-cell with the largest content will also be the largest table-cell. By setting the table-layout property to fixed we force each cell to have an equal width. If the cell has a specified width, the cell will follow the specified width and the other cells will divide the remaining space equally.

##### Border collapse
```css
.table {
  border-collapse: separate | collapse;
  display: table;
}

.table-cell {
  display: table-cell;
  border: solid 1px #bada55;
}
```

The default value of the border-collapse property is 'separate' which means that each cell has it's own stand alone border. In this case you'll be able to provide some spacing between cells using the 'border-spacing' property. When you set the border-collapse property to 'collapse' you force the borders of each cell to join so it looks like there only one border between the two cells. Because the borders are joined, it's not possible to provide spacing between the borders anymore.

##### Vertical Alignment

The most powerful feature of a table-cell is it's ability to vertically align its content. You'll finally be able to use the 'vertical-align' property and it will actually do something!

```css
.table-cell {
  display: table-cell;
  vertical-align: middle;
}
```

### Flex

Flexbox is a very powerful display value and is most commonly used to create a grid system. We'll talk about this in a [later chapter](../Chapter%204:%20Responsive%20Grid/4.2%20Grid%20Systems.md).

## Margin and Padding

There's not that much to say about padding and margin, but we still like to cover the subject so it's very clear what the properties do. If you specify margin on a certain element you'll add some spacing around the element, or in other words you'll push other elements away from your element. When specifying padding on an element you'll push its content away from the border of your element.

#### Example

```css 
.selector {
  margin: 10px; /* you can use all length units */
  padding: 10px;
}
```

#### Shorthand Notation

For both properties you can use following shorthand notations.

```css
.selector {
  margin: top right bottom left;
  margin: top rightLeft bottom;
  margin: topBottom rightLeft;
  margin: topBottomRightLeft;
}
```

## Specifying Sizes

### Width

When you're specifying the width of an element you can use all length units without any problems. You can use both relative as absolute units. It's also possible to specify a maximum width and a minimum width.

#### Example
```css
.selector {
  max-width: 900px; 
  min-width: 300px;
  width: 90%;
}
```

In the example above the element will take up 90% of it container element but will always be min. 300px and max. 900px wide.

### Height

When using absolute units to specify the height of an element you'll hardly have any problems and just like with specifying the width it's also possible to specify a maximum height and a minimum height. The problems starts when we're trying to use relative units. When using percentages, all your container elements should have a height specified. This starting from the 'html' and 'body' elements. An example will make this more clear.

#### Example
```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div class="selector">Example</div>
  </body>
</html>
```

```css
.selector {
  height: 100%;
  background-color: #bada55;
}
```

The example above will not work, we'll need to specify the width on it's container elements.

```css
html, body {
  height: 100%;
}
````

Yayy, it works! When starting a new project we strongly advise to add the example above to your CSS. This will make later sizing easier.
