[‹ previous](./1.1%20Introduction.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[home](../../README.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[next ›](./1.3%20Units.md)

# 1.2 Colors

In this chapter we will find out how to work with colors in CSS.

## Content

- [Keyword](#keyword)
- [Hexadecimal](#hexadecimal)
- [RGB & RGBa](#rgb--rgba)
- [HSL & HSLa](#hsl--hsla)
- [Properties](#properties)

## Keyword
First we have the **Keyword Colors**. These are names mapped to a specific value, speciefied by the W3C).
Examples are: `black`, `white`, `red`, `green`, `blue`, `hotpink`, ...
Because of the limited use it isn't the required way of working.

#### Example
```css
p {
    color: hotpink;
}
```

## Hexadecimal
Next we have Hexadecimal Colors. The are a combination of a has # and three or six characters.
The possible characters are `0` through 9 and `a` through `f`.

The first 2 characters represent the red value, the third and fourth green and the last ones blue.
When you have a repeating value eg. `#ff00ff`, you can shorthand it to `#f0f`. 
This way of working is the most common one, mainly because it has 16,7 million different colors.

#### Example
```css
p {
    color: #bada55;
    background: #f00;
}
```

## RGB & RGBa
Red, Green & Blue values each accept a value from 0 to 255 where 0 is black and 255 is white.
It may also include an alpha by using `rgba()`. 
The fourth parameter will be the transparency, ranging from 0 to 1.
These colors are gaining popularity mainly because of the `rgba()` syntax.

#### Example
```css
p {
    color: rgb(255, 133, 133);
    background: rgba(255, 133, 133, .75);
}
```

## HSL & HSLa
The syntax is similar to the `rgb()` and `rgba()` syntax, but recieves values for Hue, Saturation and Lightness.

#### Example
```css
p {
    color: hsla(0, 100%, 25%);
    background: hsla(0, 100%, 25%, .25);
}
```

HSL and HSLa are the newest members of the colors family, so they aren't widely used.

## Properties
Colors are used at various places in CSS, underneath you'll find a brief summary of these properties.

- `color`: sets the font color
- `background-color`: sets the background color
- `border-color`: sets the border color
- `box-shadow`: you can use color variables inside the box-shadow to set the color of the shadow
- `text-shadow`: you can use color variables inside the text-shadow to set the color of the shadow
- `text-decoration-color`: sets the color of the text decoration, for example a line underneath your text
- `text-stroke-color`: sets the color of the stroke around your text if a text stroke is specified
