[‹ previous](./1.3%20Colors.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[home](../../README.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[next ›](./1.5%20Typography.md)

# 1.4 Units
Like with the colors there are number of different values for lengths.
They are divided into two groups, absolute and relative units. In this chapter we will find out all about these units.

## Content

- [Absolute units](#absolute-units)
- [Relative units](#relative-units)
- [Percentages](#percentages)

## Absolute units
The most known absolute length unit in CSS is `px`.
For regular screens, one pixel is one dot of the screen. 
With newer, eg retina, screens and print it is a combination of several pixels that represent roughly the same density as regular screens (96 pixels per inch).

The other absolute units are `mm`, `cm`, `in`, `pt` and `pc`, but these are less used because they have no real relationship to a screen.
For example `1in` is alway `96px`, but it isn't a real inch.

## Relative units
At the side of the relative units, there is a difference between font based values and viewport percentage values.

The `em` is the most frequently used font based value. 
It represents the font-size of the element, or when used in the font-size property, it represents the inherited font-size.

Others are `ex`, `ch` and `rem`. The last one represents the font-size of the root element `<html>`.

On the other hand we have the viewport percentage values. These values were introduced with CSS3 and are not everywhere implemented as they should be.
Only Gecko browsers update the values on resizing the screen. 

The values you can use are `vh` and `vw`, which represent 1% op either the viewport height or width.
Values `vmin` and `vmax` represent 1% of the minimum value between the height and the width of the viewport. 

## Percentages
Percentages are accepted by some properties, but they are technically no length values.