[‹ previous](./3.1-Sizing.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[home](../../README.md)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[next ›](./3.3-Alignment.md)

# 3.2 Positioning

CSS positioning is one of the most used parts of CSS. Positioning an element is done by the `position` property. An element is positioned according their calculated position.

- [Position](#position)
- [Float](#float)

## Position
Position can be one of the following:

```css
.foo {
	position: static | relative | absolute | fixed | sticky;
}
```

### Static
Elements are by default `static`, which means that they are positioned according the normal flow of the document. `top`, `right`, `bottom`, `left` and `z-index` properties have no effect on these elements.

### Relative
When an element has `position: relative` it acts as if it has no positioning at all. It changes its positioning but it does not change the surrouning layout.

### Absolute
`Absolute` means that it does not reserve space for the element. Instead, it becomes relatively positioned to its closest positioned parent. If this parent does not exist it uses the initial container.

### Fixed
As the `Absolute` positioning, this does not leave space for the element. The positioning is relative to the viewport and stays on the same location when the page is scrolled. When applying this value a new stacking context is created.

Note: when printed, this element repeats on every page.

### Sticky [!?](http://caniuse.com/#feat=css-sticky)
This is still an experimental feature. It is a mix between relative and fixed positioning.

The positioning is handeled as relative until the element crosses a certain point, at which is is considered as fixed.

For example a title in the page has the following css:

```css
.bar {
	position: sticky;
	top: 30px;
}
```

The element is positioned relative until the viewport scroll that the element would be less then 30px from the top. From that moment on the element would be position fixed at 30px from the top.

In order for this to work one of `top`, `right`, `bottom` or `left` should be set on the element. Otherwise it remains relative.


## Float
The float property specifies that an element should be taken from the regular flow and is positioned to the left or right side of its container or another floating element.
Other inline elements in the flow wrap around this.

An element is floating when their calculated float property is different then `none`.

The float property implies that you use `display: block;`. In most cases it modifies the display property.

```css
.baz {
	float: none | left | right;
}
```

### Clearing floats

The clear property defines whether the element should be next to another floating element or should move down below them.

```css
.quux {
	clear: none | left | right | both;
}
```

With the `none` property, the element will not move down. When using `left` or `right`, the element is moved down to clear left/right floats.
When using both the element is moved down in either situation.
