# 3.5 Grid Layout

Grid Layout is a proposal originally made by the Microsoft team. It takes a different approach then Flexbox since Flexbox works on a 1 dimensional system whereas Grid layout is a 2 dimensional system covering both rows and columns.

It is the first system that is made for layouting pages. All previous ways was just using properties to hack a layout, but it always had a downside eg. no vertical alignment, no equal heights, ...

As is the case with Flexbox, Grid Layout also has properties for both parent and child elements. In general they have been working on aligning a lot of properties and values between Flexbox and Grid Layout. If there is a difference between them it is probably an error. This specification is still a Candidate Recommendation so it is still subject to changes.

## Support

| IE | Edge | Firefox | Chrome | Safari |
| -- | ---- | ------- | ------ | ------ |
| ⚠️ | ⚠️   | 😺       | 😺     | 😺     |

⚠️ IE and Edge support an older version of the spec + both are prefixed with `-ms-`.


## FR

Grid Layout also introduces the `fr` unit. This represents a fraction of the free space in the container.

They are not length or percentage units so they cannot be used in for example `calc()`.

## Properties

### Parent Element

#### display

The most important property of all, display. This creates the grid container.

```css
.foo {
    display: grid | inline-grid | subgrid;
}
```

> ⚠️ Subgrid is moved to level 2 of the specification

___

#### grid-template-columns and grid-template-rows

These properties define the columns and the rows of the grid. The values passed into these properties resemble the size of the track.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: <track-size> ... | <line-name> <track-size> ...;
    grid-template-rows: <track-size> ... | <line-name> <track-size> ...;
}
```

- `<track-size>` can be a length, percentage or a `fr` unit.
- `<line-name>` is a name you can choose. If you don't provide this, the track names are assigned numerical names.
- `auto`

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: 50% 50px auto;
    grid-template-rows: [foo] 50% [bar] 50px [baz quux] auto; /* multiple names are also a possibility */
}
```

You can also use the `repeat()` syntax to handle repeating items.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(3, [col-start] 20%) 40%;
    /* results in */
    grid-template-columns: [col-start] 20% [col-start] 20% [col-start] 20% 40%;
}
```

The `fr` unit can be used as the following:

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr; /* each column is 50% wide */
    grid-template-rows: 20px 1fr 1fr; /* each row takes up 50% of the available space (100% - 20px) */
}
```

#### grid-template-areas

`grid-template-areas` defines a named grid area. If a name is repeated, the area will span over the different columns/rows.
The way you write the value of the property resembles the grid visually.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-areas:
        "<grid-area-name> | . | none | ..."
        "..."
}
```

- `<grid-area-name>` is a name you can choose yourself.
- `.` resembles an empty area
- `none`

Each row has to contain the same amount of columns. This only gives names to areas, not lines.
These will be names automatically, so an area with the name `foo` will have a starting column line of `foo-start` and an ending column line of `foo-end`.

This results in double naming of lines. The line between area `foo` and area `bar` will have both `foo-end` and `bar-start` as their name.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-areas:
        "logo logo header"
        "nav subnav content"
        "footer footer footer";
    grid-template-columns: 50px 200px 1fr;
    grid-template-rows: 50px 1fr 50px;
}
```


#### grid-template

`grid-template` is the shorthand version of `grid-template-columns`, `grid-template-rows` and `grid-template-areas`.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template: none | subgrid | <grid-template-rows> / <grid-template-columns>;
}
```

- `subgrid` sets `grid-template-columns` and `grid-template-rows` to `subgrid`
- `<grid-template-rows> / <grid-template-columns>` sets `grid-template-columns` and `grid-template-rows` to the given values
- `none`

It also works with a more complicate value which also specifies `grid-template-areas`. The following code has the same result as the previous example.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template:
        "logo logo header" 50px
        "nav subnav content" 1fr
        "footer footer footer" 50px
        / 50px 200px 1fr;
}
```

#### grid-column-gap and grid-row-gap

Just like the name already tells you, these properties set the width of the gutters between rows/columns.

```css
.parent {
    grid-column-gap: <line-size>;
    grid-row-gap: <line-size>;
}
```

- `<line-size>` can be any length value.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: 50px 200px 1fr;
    grid-template-rows: 50px 1fr 50px;
    grid-column-gap: 10px;
    grid-row-gap: 20px;
}
```

#### grid-gap

`grid-gap` is the shorthand for `grid-column-gap` and `grid-row-gap`.

```css
.parent {
    grid-gap: <grid-row-gap> <grid-column-gap>;
}
```

If only one value is provided, both `grid-row-gap` and `grid-column-gap` have the same value.

```css
.parent {
    grid-template-columns: 50px 200px 1fr;
    grid-template-rows: 50px 1fr 50px;
    grid-gap: 20px 10px;
}
